Most of us have no idea how devastating a life lived
indoors in front of our computers and televisions
has affected our well-being, mentally, physically,
and emotionally.
In fact, we were born to be bathed in light and color.
Fortunately, Brian Breiling and others have begun bringing
light and color therapy to the forefront of healing.
A favorite healing modality of mine for over
20 years now, color and light are profound
and immediate in their effects.
Brian began his journey with colors nearly
20 years ago.
(lively piano and light drumming)
So, well first of all,
it's starting to appear that an awful lot of our chronic
disorders, not just with children but with adults,
are stemming from a lack of contact with light.
And also a living in a world where we're not getting
true color, light and color, and these ancient, ancient
forms of healing, thank God, are being remembered,
and people like yourself are bringing them back.
But what is happening when you live a life
sitting in a drab office, or driving on a freeway
looking at gray tar, you know overcast skies,
and you're deprived of real light?
What happens to the being?
Well it's kind of a brain toxic
and certainly an emotionally toxic lifestyle.
And we've forgotten that we are creatures
of nature, that we were designed to live
and work outdoors, and since the industrial
revolution we've moved inside
under artificial light that is great for reading,
but not so great for our health.
And the ultimate source of light and healthy light
is sunlight, and being without an adequate
amount of sunlight or the color distribution
of sunlight would make someone mentally
dull, foggy, perhaps increase anxiety,
and even in our common language
we have ideas like someone is dull
or dim-witted, versus if someone is having
enough light they're bright, they're illuminated,
or to the ultimate extreme, even enlightened.
Mhmm.
Light has such a profound effect
on our health and I think it's the most
underrated aspect of our health.
Mhmm, I agree with you.
I mean we're seeing evidence of it.
Look at all the kids and people that are putting on,
as they say, vitamin P, Prozac.
How much of that do you think is actually
related to the fact that their beings are light deprived?
Quite a lot.
You know, our, if you look at circadian rhythms,
our 24 hour biochemistry,
our sleep, we have a sleep chemistry that comes on at night
if we're lucky, and we have a daytime chemistry
that gears us for alertness and energy and action.
If someone stays up too late or is involved
in an artifically lit environment, that is not
healthy for them, it can throw off their circadian rhythms,
and indeed in very conservative medical circles
they're looking at all psychiatric illness,
not only depression, winter depression, bipolar illness,
things like schizophrenia, even Alzheimer's disease
being related to a circadian rhythm disturbance
which has do do,
essentially with our rhythms being out of balance
because we're not exposed
to the natural frequencies of sunlight.
And using artificial light sources that mimic sunlight,
you can put people back in rhythm
with their 24 hour biochemistry, and really help them
profoundly, mentally and emotionally.
Even someone as far gone as in the early
or middle stages of Alzheimer's will respond to artificial
bright, white light to help balance
their brain chemistry and also put them
in sync with their 24 hour rhythm.
Yes and often that makes sense,
because people with Alzheimer's are often elderly,
and they're often shut-ins.
That's right
And so they're getting almost no natural light.
Absolutely.
That's very interesting.
And they have what's called free-running
circadian clocks, the sundowner syndrome,
where they'll go to bed at a different time every night,
which is really a problem for caregivers,
especially if they get out in the middle of the night
and wander the streets.
Mhmm.
What they're finding now is putting very bright light
that's diffuse, 20 times brighter than our normal
indoor light, but it's diffuse, it's like looking through
a rice paper, like a shoji screen,
but if you put that in the day room
where these Alzheimer's patients are,
it'll normalize their circadian rhythm.
It'll quiet their agitation
and help them sleep through the night,
and it's such a great help for the caregivers
in even a hospital situation,
but I imagine even for those who are caring
for Alzheimer's patients at home.
Mhmm, and when you got into it,
it was the other end of the spectrum,
you were actually interested in children who were displaying
a lot of hyperactive behaviors and so forth.
Exactly.
So tell us how you got into this,
and where your original discoveries were.
In the late 1970s, I was a school psychologist
and a lot of the special-ed students,
50% of 'em, and some of the classes were on medication.
These were young kids, these were--
What percent?
50%, this was in the early 70s,
and it went through a dip.
And now we're seeing in the last several years,
kids going through more medication,
and I can talk about medication as a consumer.
I'm a psychologist, I'm not a medical doctor,
but I thought, there had to be a way naturally,
that we can provide the children's brains
and nervous systems with what they
would need to either focus and concentrate,
or slow down,
whatever their particular biochemistry needed.
Could we do this with non-drug alternatives?
And I started to explore biofeedback training,
EEG biofeedback and temperature warming,
and muscle relaxation, essentially teaching kids
how to be better yogis, how to control
their biochemistry by self-regulation techniques.
A friend of mine who's an optometrist taught
me that everything I was doing with brain wave
biofeedback I could do better with light,
and that started me on a journey that's been
about 20 years now, using bright, white light,
and then alternatively, specific colors of light
through the eyes, not only working with children
with learning problems, but more recently
using different colors of strobing light
or solid light to help people unravel their traumas
that long-time held emotional difficulties in psychotherapy.
And that's my real passion, is working,
using colored light as a tool to help awaken
consciousness.
Right.
Help people be the very best they can be
emotionally, mentally, using light as a performance tool
and helping people let go of chronically held
physical tensions, emotional tensions,
and light does that.
It's for me, like the ultimate power tool.
Mhmm, absolutely, and one of the most
available power tools out there.
Absolutely.
And inexpensive power tools.
That's right.
Now in the 1970s, that was before
we even had video games, so you weren't getting
that whole interface going on with the kids,
but people were eating a lot of sugared cereals
for breakfast and the like,
and so you had that type of thing.
What does it look like now with kids who
basically are shut in?
Shut in, video game addicitions,
iPods tuning out, all kinds of attention problems
and mood disorders from kids essentially being
indoors too much, and adults.
I mean I think this obesity epidemic that we're seeing
is partly because of our indoor light style,
lifestyle, light style too.
Yeah.
And also because of our diet--
Right.
And if we can use both of those, diet, exercise,
herbs, as well as natural things as light,
we might be able to titrate down
some of the medications, at least that was my hope.
Yeah, so let's look at that about,
well you just talked about the subject of obesity,
for example, have you used color at all
when it comes to various types of addictions,
and like you say, mood-altering, certainly,
but even to help break addictive patterns and the like?
Yes.
Just the mainstream medical research the last 20 years
has looked at bright, white light for winter depression,
and the things that we used to treat, that I still treat
with things, the class of drugs, selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors like Prozac,
and one of the light research studies
that was fascinating to me
was that there's a type of bulimia, an eating disorder
that has to do with people craving carbohydrates
and putting on an extra 15, 20 pounds in the winter.
That's very light associated, isn't it--
It's very light associated.
Serotonin cycles, yeah.
Exactly, exactly.
So during the dark, winter months,
people try to replace that fall in serotonin
from a lack of light,
so light balances, increases serotonin,
and also norepinephrine, which means that bright light,
sun light, or even some very conscious use
of wonderful, artificial, broad-spectrum light
in your work situation or in your home
can help really balance your brain chemistry profoundly.
And that has, obviously upshots, for things like obesity.
Mhmm.
Now behind every addiction,
there is a wall of chronic pain.
And people use their addictions to run from something
that's traumatic, something that happened
in childhood, maybe the loss of a current relationship,
a disappointment at work, what have you.
And using colored light, we can go into those
areas that they have shut down their emotional processing
and then help give them back
more control of their emotional life.
And it is interesting
because of the very strong responses,
and we were talking off camera a little bit
about watching people turn around so rapidly
by infusing the color they're repulsed by.
Right.
Talk about an emotional landmine waiting there.
Can you talk about what happens?
Yeah, we have comfort colors
and we have colors that I jokingly say we're allergic to.
There's colors that we go, "Oh I just want more of that,
"I really love that."
Then there's colors we want to push away,
and I can even show this
like taking people through 20 pieces of colored paper.
There will be colors that people will immediately
gravitate towards and others they'll be repulsed by.
But by slowly and very compassionately learning
to sit with what we feel and what we think
when we're looking at a particular color of light,
you can also do it with reflected colors,
like wall colors or I was mentioning, colored paper.
But colored light gives the quickest result.
Things come up emotionally that they may not have
been aware of.
They may have not have thought about for years,
and it just helps 'em with breathing
and bringing awareness and all the things
we do in psychotherapy to keep them present in their body
to help them go through that in a quicker way
than they would have without it,
so the rejected colors are very significant,
and I think the goal--
Everybody needs to take a little moment
and think about that right now.
What colors do I really, really hate you know and--
Yeah, exactly.
Versus which ones do I find,
'cause for a lot of men, for example,
they live in a world of say blue and red.
Absolutely.
Those are the dominant male colors as I recall,
right?
Right, right.
The power of colors in business.
The blue suit, the red tie.
That, for example--
And blue being very mental, very analytical,
and manifestation, power of the blood red and so forth--
Exactly.
But look at all those colors that are missing
in between.
What would happen?
I love to see a man in a pink shirt.
Yeah.
I just think it's a beautiful resonance.
So what happens, you take a guy like that
and you put him in pink?
Well, if he's manly...
(laughing)
And he's big enough to accept that.
When I work with people,
to have them get more comfortable with the colors
they push away, they become more full spectrum humans,
that the colors they previously rejected,
they start wearing and start experimenting more
with their life.
And some of this is constitutional
and some of it's seasonal related too.
It's like, in the middle of summer,
when it's a hundred degrees in Sacramento,
we're not gonna want huge amounts of artificial light
or even huge amounts of sunlight.
We're trying to run away from the heat.
And in the summer, we'll gravitate towards
the cooler colors, the greens, the blues,
that type of thing.
Pastels, yellow.
Pastels, exactly.
But in everyday life, I think if a man,
our archetypal business man were to become comfortable
with all his colors that he pushed away,
he'd be a better father, he'd be a better husband.
He'd be more emotionally responsive.
And, I believe it would have greater access
to the creative potential in parts of his brain
that he may have been shutting away,
so he would be I think a fuller human,
which is the goal for all of us.
Mhmm.
And would you mind going into,
without names of course,
a couple of case studies that you found
particularly fascinating and maybe even profound
in their effects?
This is great.
There's a woman, I'll call her Louise.
She was a very conservative computer programmer.
And, she came to my office.
I had seen her in talk therapy for about five years,
and she had a severe migraine, and she said,
"I have a very bad migraine."
I said, "Oh, I'm so sorry."
We were talking about something stressful related to her
relationship with her mother, and she said,
"Oh my God, I don't have my medication."
And I said, "Oh, that's OK.
"We can take--"
She says, "You don't understand.
"I always go to the hospital and I start throwing up.
"These migraines come on very intensely."
So, this was at a time that I didn't
incorporate light into my psychotherapy practice,
and I had nothing to lose
so I put this woman under a colored light,
violet, associated where she was experiencing
the migraine in the top of her head,
and I just had her talk.
Tell me what's going on in your mind.
Let's talk about your mother, where you left off.
And she felt increased blood flow
into her head, and then the tears would come,
that she saw the difficulty she had connecting
with this man that she ultimately married,
and how she was pushing him away
because she didn't trust him.
And as the tears came, the headache started to break,
and the migraine dissipated within about ten minutes.
And that was big enough for me as my first
kind of like, I had to think on my feet to use light,
to see that it could be used psycho therapeutically
at the same time.
I mean you can use light as a drug,
which light will have drug-like effects on our biochemistry,
and certainly our hormones.
But you can use it to help open consciousness.
And the other thing that was extraordinary about this case,
'cause here's a woman who's very conservative,
it wasn't somebody that indeed,
and at a time in my practice 20 years ago,
that I would be hesitant to talk about things spiritual.
Mhmm.
But as she started releasing this headache,
she started going into this full body energetic release,
and I just encouraged her to breathe
and go into it as she was looking at this violet
light talking.
And in a period of 15-20 minutes,
she had a full blown,
what I would say, a surrendering,
an opening, a spiritual opening experience.
And we can put other words on it,
maybe it was a Kundalini opening
or opening of her heart,
but her heart did open,
and tears of joy started coming through.
And she said, "As a young girl I really had a mystical
"connection with Mother Mary,
"and I yearn for this.
"I've had my fight with the church."
I won't say which church she was involved in.
"And I really yearn for that spiritual quality in my life."
"And this is bringing it back."
So, that was the beginning,
that was the first time I had seen somebody
go into a spiritual experience in my office
just using light through the eyes.
Mhmm.
And from there and on,
she used to have migraines even with medications
several times of week,
and the medication was doing a good job
that she could you know, make her salary
as a computer programmer,
but the headaches went to once every three months,
and once every six months
as she started working her consciousness with light.
Right.
And then, you know, we terminated.
But that one experience with light was such a profound
gift for me, because it showed me what was possible
emotionally, what was possible physically,
and what's possible certainly spiritually.
My wife Jennifer over here is a chiropractor.
She'll see people in chronic pain.
We'll work with people psychologically
with light through the eyes and often times
in a short period of time, chronically held pain
for 10-15 years can be dissipated
in a matter of just a few office sessions.
And people are amazed by it
'cause I think that somehow we get used to pain
and think it's our birthright that--
(laughing)
Right.
You know, we confuse our identity
that you know, my pain, myself,
and when they can release it and open up to
indeed the emotional pain that often
is you know chronically held in the musculature.
When that lets go,
their lives can be profoundly transformed,
and I'm not into seeing people for 20 years
and you know, being their mommy or their best friend.
Right.
But to help people just using light
as a stimulus to help them transform
and leave their life a lot better than when they came in.
So it would seem that as you're working
with people with color,
you are working with consciousness.
You're certainly working with the brain.
Yes.
And all the glandular system.
And it would be that those signals
are essentially balanced or altered
as a results of this very natural phenomena,
back what it should have been and was all along
until we started cloistering ourselves
in our little cubbies at the office.
Absolutely.
And so the brain chemistry changes.
It sends different different signals,
the inflammation starts going away.
I mean it really is a cascading effect.
Absolutely, our lives have profoundly changed
because of indoor light in the 1880s.
I mean, 95% of us worked outdoors.
We were agrarian, and we didn't live inside.
And until the 1930s, when electric lights
started to become widely available in the US,
people slept an average of 10 hours a night.
Right.
Now you and I don't know anybody in our lives
who sleeps more than probably seven
or eight hours a night.
Right.
So think about, where's that three hours?
And before that, even in the Middle Ages,
there's some documents that said the quote,
"average person" used to sleep in two shifts
but about 14 hours a night.
Wow.
And because of indoor light,
things like internet,
you know 500 channels of cable TV,
which are wonderful modern conveniences.
And the internet, I wouldn't like to be without those,
but it's profoundly changed our lifestyle.
And indeed, I think we're burning the candle at both ends.
I mean you see adrenal burnout, exhaustion.
We call it depression.
We're treating it with Prozac and SSRIs,
which are very helpful.
People should not, you know have to go through
a suicidal crisis,
and should have any help they can to get through that.
But, it's a matter of lifestyles have gone so far
out of balance because of our using indoor light,
and not knowing how to maintain our connection
with nature and sunlight,
which drives every single biochemical reaction
in our body.
With all of that,
if you go to your doctor,
first of all they're gonna warn you off of sun.
Sure.
Now something's really frighteningly
wrong with that.
Sure.
The very nutrients that feed our brains
and allow us to be vital human beings
are the very things that we're frightened of now.
Right.
Oh, you'll get you know skin cancer
and all of that.
Right.
So can you address that a little bit?
Yeah, we've thrown the baby out with bathwater.
Use an analogy, it's like we're saying,
"Oh, because you can drowned in water,
"you've got to avoid water."
Well we need water for health
and we've forgotten we need a certain amount
of sunlight for health.
And depending where we live,
how north we live,
our requirements for sunlight increase.
There's been a lot of interest recently
in Vitamin D, D3.
Right.
The sunlight vitamin produced by
when sunlight hits the skin.
It produces Vitamin D which is essential
for the immune system.
It's also essential for osteoporosis,
mineralization of the bones.
You need Vitamin D to mineralize your bones
and feel vital, so I'm running aside.
So remind me what I was talking about.
Oh yeah.
This is a huge topic.
The doctors basically are warning us off it.
"Oh no, it's scary.
"Skin cancers."
Yeah.
And the reality is,
even putting the sunblock on,
you're blocking the absorption of the Vitamin D.
Yes.
So, where's the truth lie in all of this
about going out and enjoying the sunshine?
Well, the scary truth.
I mean we need sunshine.
I mean that's obvious.
And our environment as The 11th Hour
and all these wonderful films by Al Gore
have shown is really changing dramatically.
The Ozone layer is thinning dramatically
in areas close to the equator
so the quantity of the ultraviolet light,
while we need ultraviolet light,
a certain amount of it to produce Vitamin D,
too much of it has been implicated
in certain skin cancers.
Mhmm.
And, so I think as a conscious health consumer,
we have to become aware of our skin type.
You know, are we like,
are our eyes dark, you know full of melanin?
Is are skin dark?
Or are we some of these people who really do better
avoiding as much light.
You know like the Northern European people.
Pale blue eyes, blond hair, pale, pale skin.
Pale blue eyes, super white skin.
Exactly.
But during the winter, places like Norway,
there's certain places in Norway
and Northern England, they don't see the sunlight
for 40 days a year.
Right.
It doesn't come over the horizon.
So there's all these, not only
you know increase alcoholism in places
that are dark 'cause they're craving the serotonin.
But there's all these immune disorders that have to do
with a lack of sunlight, and we need Vitamin D3,
the sunlight vitamin,
to keep our immune system up.
And yeah, I'm concerned about you know the geometric rise
in skin cancers, and I think part of it
has to do with unconscious sun exposure.
Well, and also,
I remember reading a book.
Oh gosh, I think it was in the early 80s
called the Sugar Blues.
Yes.
And basically they were saying
in that book it was saying that a lot of the skin cancers
are because we have poor dietary habits,
especially sugar, and if you eat a lot of that,
that interaction with whatever that creates in your skin,
those chemicals with the sun,
is actually what's creating the problem.
If you have a healthy diet,
you shouldn't be experiencing those kinds of,
in general, now granted the Ozone layer has depleted some
since then, but still they say it's often a function
of diet.
Sure, acid diet with sugar,
a lack of antioxidants, Vitamin A, E, D.
All those things will help the sun,
you know basically protect itself.
Mhmm.
But we should know our skin type
and what is our minimum daily requirement for light.
Right.
And that minimum daily requirement's gonna change
based on your skin color, your eye color,
where you're living.
Obviously, you know case in point,
that when we go on vacations,
most of us go to places that are sunny.
That's right.
And we'll be completely white, unprepared,
and go lie on Waikiki Beach, for example,
and you walk by Waikiki and see everybody's--
Lobster.
Blood lobsters.
Exactly, with like blisters on their back,
and we're going, "Oh my God."
Yeah, that's obviously unwise.
Protest these people.
But you know, we crave this thing
that we've gotten so far away from, sunlight.
And it's a matter of learning what's the right balance
for our unique, constitutional type?
And skin type, and eye color type.
And they often say going out in the morning,
for example, going out at eight, nine o'clock
in the morning and just going for a nice, little walk.
Absolutely.
Or even to just sit in the sun
and read the paper--
Absolutely.
Is a good way to do it.
You're not in the intense rays of the day,
and after four in the afternoon even.
Exactly.
So I mean there are ways we can do this
if we make it a priority--
Right.
At no risk to ourselves and all gain, right?
Absolutely, all gain.
Well now what about the subject
of solar gazing, because that's actually starting to
rise up again, another ancient technology
and ancient knowledge.
Well I think that piggy backs on what you're saying
that if we can get the sunlight just as the sun
comes over the horizon,
when it can be filtered through the most atmosphere
we'll get the benefits without the detriments of sunlight.
And solar gazing, what little I've read about it,
has to do with eyes open, looking at the horizon
just as the sun is coming up.
Now, when the sun is up like
10 o'clock or 11 o'clock in the morning,
that same quantity of light would actually burn the retina
and would be dangerous and people would be blind.
But, you know, that amount of brightness of light
is actually the brightness of light that we use in a,
I have a box behind me here that we use to treat
winter depression.
It's 10,000 lux of light.
It's a certain brightness of light that has to do with
the brightness of light as it comes over the horizon
in the morning.
So there's actually some really great studies to show,
talking about depression,
that people who get out for a half hour of exercise a day
who are deeply depressed,
their mood will increase as much or actually greater
than working with an anti-depressant.
Now some people may need anti-depressants,
but if you're not having the great therapeutic effect
with an anti-depressant,
why not try exercise and sunlight?
If you're living in a place where you can't get out
because of the coldness or maybe it's too dark,
you can supplement the indoor lighting you have
with what we call a bright light or broad spectrum
light box.
Exercise in front of it.
Eat your breakfast in front of it.
Just to get a little Vitamin L as I call it.
Right.
Light through the eyes, which will jump start
the brain chemistry,
make you feel a lot more alert, more positive,
and actually synchronize your 24 hour rhythm
to be alert during the day and falling asleep
at the appropriate time at night so--
Right.
Well, that makes total sense.
How about, are the units now made small enough
and portable enough where you can even have them
in your work space?
Yes.
In terms of the broad spectrum?
Absolutely.
Mhmm, full spectrum light.
Yeah, there's many, many companies
that make these real portable, probably six inches
wide by maybe a foot, foot and a half tall.
And they're a nice supplement if you have to be indoors
in a dark cubby, God forbid,
but we all have to make money.
Right, exactly.
But that seems like a wonderful antidote to it.
Absolutely.
And there's actually light visors,
which look like baseball caps
that they're using a particular color of light.
It's very interesting now, Regina,
that they're using a particular color of blue
to blue green, I can show you that device
if you're interested--
Yeah.
But the color that seems to suppress Melatonin
and Melatonin's the sleep hormone,
and essentially people who have winter depression
are a little foggy or chronically depressed in the winter.
This particular frequency of blue switches off
the brain chemistry or the sleep chemistry
so they can feel more alert.
So there's experimenting instead of using white,
bright light, they're using a dimmer quantity
of this blue-green light
that seems to drive the whole circadian rhythm.
Fascinating.
Very interesting.
Yeah.
So many cool devices out there right now.
I saw another one a friend of mine has,
I think they call it the mind spa.
Wow.
It's the little device that has both tone
and it also comes across the eyes like a visor,
and you can set it on programs for different
strobing rhythms and colors.
And I mean, the technology has become much more
affordable.
And user friendly.
And more sophisticated,
and user friendly, and personally,
in fact I think to myself,
"I knew about all this and was you know
"very involved in the color therapy 20 years ago,
"so why haven't I been doing it?"
Right.
I mean I go out for walks in the morning
and that so I get the sunlight,
but the joy of working with these colors
is really profound I find.
Profound.
I mean you can literally switch your mood
like that, right?
Yes, absolutely.
So are there more color devices
where you can do your own little gels
and kind of regulate your own experience
at home more these days?
I think they're coming.
The devices that you talk about,
just to go back, the brain wave entrainment.
You can take someone who hasn't meditated
a day in their life and put on a pair of goggles
and headphones that will slow their brain waves down
from their normal chattery brain wave
down to deep levels of meditation.
Or this other client I had who was an Iraq War
Colonel.
He was over there and you know in a place
where jets were landing every two hours,
and he had a sleep problem.
But he took this light and sound device,
put it on a sleep program,
and was able to sleep his four hours a night.
You know his night shift and go deep.
So these things can really profoundly override
a lot of our, you know trauma.
God forbid, you know there's Iraq War veterans
that are gonna come back,
there's 200,000 people I believe
who have served in Iraq and Afghanistan,
will have various levels of post-traumatic stress disorder
and they can be helped.
Mhmm.
And their families can be helped
using these strobing colored light devices.
There are growing,
there's a revolution in colored lighting,
with light emitting diodes.
Before we had to use an incandescent bulb
that would mimic sunlight.
And light emitting diodes now
will probably replace fluorescents.
I imagine in about five years.
OK.
They're energy efficient.
Probably as great in energy efficiency as compact
fluorescents.
But you can produce any color of the visible spectrum,
and actually in very narrow slices.
And what we've found about these very narrow
or very monochromatic slices of light,
about ten nano-meters,
they have profound effects,
actually quicker effects,
more bodily-oriented effects,
more emotional effects,
faster and deeper than broader spectrum.
For example, with green there might be
70 different greens.
Right.
Whereas, if you take a particular, narrow slice,
you can go quite a bit deeper faster.
And green is a color I use a lot
for people who have grief issues.
They feel sadness or abandonment issues.
Issues of the heart.
Right.
And it helps them get in touch with that,
to grieve the losses,
and essentially open their heart to themselves
and life again.
Right.
So that's really gratifying.
And they're coming slowly.
But people, I think because it's light,
we're like fish looking at water.
You know, we think,
we take light and color for granted.
And we think, "Oh, that's new age
"or it's not very powerful."
It's too subtle.
But actually, it's very physiological.
Right.
When you're using a bright light source
or even a color, I can show you on an EEG
just by putting on a pair of colored glasses,
your brain waves will change like that.
And the first time I saw this, I was astounded.
You know I've been working with color for almost 20 years
and a friend of ours has a EEG device,
and we were playing with different colored glasses
through the spectrum.
And you saw the brain waves change instantly.
The lenses were shifted.
Yes.
So, you can create states of mental clarity
or states of relaxation,
and this works great for people with anxiety disorders
or people like myself, we have trouble concentrating
after too many dark days in the winter.
Mhmm.
So we wear the yellow glasses to give me that sort of
visual caffeine, that visual cappuccino.
Mhmm.
Or, you know,
the other side to slow down, calm down.
If someone is like terrified of having like dental surgery
or dental anxiety, you can put on a pair
of very dark blue glasses that cut down the amount of light
but the blue is so calming and relaxing,
that they can go through the procedure
with a fraction of the Novocain that they would typically
use without it.
Mhmm.
So I like sending my clients home with colored glasses
to play with.
Not only their comfort color but also their issue color
that they don't want to deal with,
and help them gradually get exposed
to those aspects of their life
that they're pushing away,
become more comfortable with sitting with it
and talking about it,
journal writing about it, for example.
Any other interesting studies or breakthroughs
that have come about as of late?
Huge, you know we're still thinking
even mainstream psychiatrists, doctors,
psychologists, mental health workers,
that light is something new.
You know, and there's been 25 really great years
of the most highly controlled research on light,
and when you compare light, for example,
let's take one class of drugs, the anti-depressants.
Light will give you a faster anti-depressant response
and a greater magnitude of response
without medication.
But you can use it even for people
who are taking medication and aren't responsive,
because light is sort of natural Prozac,
and increases the same brain chemistry
as the anti-depressants.
You can get a synergistic effect
so I'm very much into empowering people
to explore what they can do to make themselves
feel and function better.
'Cause life is a performance sport.
Oh, we've gotta winter ahead here.
So, what would you say for people who are living
in cold, dank, dark climates then
instead of just espresso and baked goods?
(laughing)
And Prozac?
Reaching for that extra cookie at four in the afternoon,
and the double cappuccino.
Exactly, get that serotonin up.
Yeah.
How would you do it?
How would you have 'em manage it at home?
Well, you know exposure,
your advice about exposure.
Your early morning light, if that's possible.
You know through exercise, getting out.
If not, people can have these bright white light boxes
in front of their favorite exercise,
you know, getting on the stationary bicycle
or the cross country machine.
That's very helpful.
Or even eating your cereal,
if you can't exercise, eating your cereal or reading
a book with having the bright light box in front of you
and just, see, you don't have to look directly
at the light.
Just taking it in through the periphery
is enough to profoundly change your brain chemistry.
Mhmm.
And there's another thing that's very cool
for those people that have to get up on these dark, cold
winter mornings and may not,
you know they're great in the spring and summer
when the sun's coming up at six o'clock,
but in the winter when the sun doesn't come up
until like eight o'clock, if it does,
you can have these light alarm clocks.
It's called dawn simulation--
Oh interesting,
I haven't heard of these.
It's great.
It's very powerful.
That our eyelids are opaque when we close them,
we actually take in a certain amount of light
through our closed eyelids.
And you can take your favorite bedside lamp
and essentially a little computer called the dawn simulator
will ramp up an hour or two hours before
you're to get up in the morning.
Oh.
And gradually get brighter and brighter.
It just sort of mimics sunrise.
And just that little bit of light through your closed
eyelid is enough to suppress your brain,
excuse me, your sleep chemistry,
so you wake up feeling alert and refreshed.
Now I'm one of these people that used to need
like two cups of coffee in the morning
before I could even hold a conversation.
But the first time I tried the dawn simulator,
I woke up right on time without any auditory alarm,
feeling alert, like it was two or three hours later.
'Cause my brain chemistry was in sync,
and the thing about today is that we have sort of
chronic jet lag.
We're out of sync with our circadian rhythms
and their current demands of our culture.
And part of it is by watching TV too late at night,
too much internet stimulation,
too much indoor light at night,
which may be suppressing your immune system.
That's one of the things that they're looking at
in this Harvard nurses study
with nurses who've had breast cancer.
I think it was a 20 year study and they're looking at
exposure to bright, artificial light.
Is it fluorescent?
We don't know,
but it's bright light at night suppressing Melatonin.
Melatonin is not only our sleep chemistry,
it's also the most powerful antioxidant in the body.
Right.
So, do we want to be suppressing it as much
as we're doing?
You know, do we want our houses to be like Walmart?
You can go into Walmart at any place in the country,
two o'clock in the morning and it's lighted
like a football field.
Right.
Well that's not good for us who need down time.
You know we need to be alert and performing
and full of vitality but we also need to go the other way
to relax and go deeply, and to have that deep
delta wave sleep that is restorative.
So we have that dawn stimulator
or whatever it's called,
give us maybe just two or three of your favorite devices
so people can start doing online searches too.
Good, yeah.
Broad spectrum light boxes.
Yeah.
I won't mention any brand names.
Yeah, we don't have to talk about--
Yeah.
That's very helpful.
Color therapy eye ware.
Mhmm.
'Cause you can do with color
what you can do with psychotherapy,
but it's more self care.
Right.
To create states of relaxation or alertness
just generally.
What's the, the dawn simulators.
Dawn simulator, OK.
There are several companies that make dawn simulators.
And, the light visor.
The light visor.
That's interesting, yeah.
Yeah, so you can use either the blue-green
which seems to suppress Melatonin
which is the sleep chemistry for winter depression.
It's seems to be very good for s-a-d.
Or a broader spectrum white bulb they use.
Right.
Great, well the tools are there.
The tools are there.
Just up to us now and a little bit of education
and I thank you so much for your time.
I think this is a subject that has been
much, much overlooked.
Even by us.
Yeah.
And I know better.
(laughing)
Thanks Regina.
Thank you for your time, Brian.
Yeah. Great.
If the subject intrigues you as it did me,
you can go to his website at lightyearsahead.net.
He has great information and tools to begin
your journey into the world of color,
which I cannot recommend highly enough.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(light drumming, slow orchestral music)